Extend plugin's documentation (#6227)
software-mansion/react-native-reanimated: packages/docs-reanimated/docs/reanimated-babel-plugin/about.md

---
id: about
title: 'About'
sidebar_label: 'About'
---

# Reanimated Babel Plugin

This article will explain what exactly is Reanimated Babel Plugin, what are its features and limitations, without going into unnecessary details.

## What is Reanimated Babel Plugin?

Reanimated Babel Plugin is the part of Reanimated that allows you to employ the second JavaScript runtime created by Reanimated, called the UI/Worklet runtime. The plugin transforms your code, injects all the necessary data into it, so that the Worklet runtime can execute the code. This data comes from _worklets_. The process of worklet transformation is called _workletization_.

## What is a worklet?

A worklet is:

- A function that contains a `'worklet'` directive at its very top, i.e.:

```ts
function foo() {
  'worklet';
  console.log('Hello from worklet');
}
```

- A function that is _autoworkletizable_, i.e.:

```ts
useAnimatedStyle(() => {

>   // This function will be ran on the Worklet Runtime,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // This function will be ran on the UI thread,
```
i know from the internals point of view a worklet runtime would be ackchyually more correct

but we never use this nomenclature in the documentation. the devs have a mental model of 2 threads - JS and UI.

I feel like saying JS runtime, Worklet runtime is kinda exposing exposing the internals of Reanimated

Author: On second thought it makes sense to stay with _UI thread_ here. 👍

  // hence it's in a workletizable context and will be
  // autoworkletized. You don't need to add the 'worklet' directive here.
  return {
    width: 100,
  };
});
```

## What can be a worklet?

Currently, Reanimated Babel Plugin supports the following constructs as worklets:

- Arrow Function Expressions

```ts
const foo = () => {
  'worklet';
  console.log('Hello from ArrowFunctionExpression');
};
```

- Function Declarations

```ts
function foo() {
  'worklet';
  console.log('Hello from FunctionDeclaration');
}
```

- Function Expressions

```ts
const foo = function () {
  'worklet';
  console.log('Hello from FunctionExpression');
};
```

- Object Methods

```ts
const obj = {
  foo() {
    'worklet';
    console.log('Hello from ObjectMethod');
  },
};
```

## Autoworkletization

> To reduce boilerplate code and relieve the user from knowing the internals of Reanimated, Reanimated Babel Plugin tries to detect automatically whether a function should be workletized. For example, all callbacks in Reanimated API that are ran on the Worklet runtime are autoworkletized, such as:

Reviewer: i don't understand this paragraph

Author: @kacperkapusciak I rewrote it. Do you think I should drop the "motives" altogether?

- `useAnimatedStyle`
- `useAnimatedProps`

> - `runOnUI`

Reviewer: Can we have a full list here? Or a link to full list in the plugin's source code?

etc.

Thanks to that, you don't need to add the `'worklet'` directive to your code when you're not exploring any advanced use cases.

### Referencing worklets

You can define worklets before they are used, and the plugin will autoworkletize them too:

```ts
function foo() {
  // You don't need to mark it as a worklet.
  return { width: 100 };
}

const style = useAnimatedStyle(foo); // You don't need to define an inline function here.
```

### Objects aggregating worklets

In some APIs, like `useAnimatedScrollHandler` you can pass an object that contains worklets instead of a function:

```ts
const handlerObject = {
  // You don't need to mark these methods as worklets.
  onBeginDrag() {
    console.log('Dragging...');
  },
  onScroll() {
    console.log('Scrolling...');
  },
};

const handler = useAnimatedScrollHandler(handlerObject);
```

### Workletizing whole files (experimental)

> You can mark a file as a workletizable file by adding the `'worklet'` directive to the top of the file. This will make all _top-level_ entities workletized. This can come in handy for files that contain multiple worklets.

Reviewer 2: Maybe just stick with functions for now and when we add support for objects and classes we can just list them there (or just go with "objects, classes, functions")?
In Erlang world the common name for that is "term" but dunno if it'd help in JS world.

> You can mark a file as a workletizable file by adding the `'worklet'` directive to the top of the file. This will make all _top-level_ entities workletized. This can come in handy for files that contain multiple worklets.

Author: The idea with listing seems good to me.

```ts
'worklet';

function foo() {
  // This function will be autoworkletized.
  return { width: 100 };
}

function bar() {
  // This function will be autoworkletized.
  function foobar() {
    // This function won't since it's not defined in top-level scope.

>     console.log('Hello from worklet');

Reviewer: the comments in this snippet and the console log are confusing

normally when we comment functions we put a comment before the name
```js
// this function does something
function superFun() {
``` 

and the console log says `"Hello from worklet"` where the comment says the function won't get workletized

Author: Some of the comments I put where the user would expect the `'worklet'` directive to be to get the "wow effect" 😄 However it might make more sense to put all such comments before the functions. What do you think?

Author: I changed the ambiguous fragments so now they explicitly say what they refer to.

  }
  return { width: 100 };
}
```

## Limits of autoworkletization

The plugin cannot infer whether a function is autoworkletizable or not in some contexts.

### Imports

When importing a function from another file or a module and using it as a worklet, you must manually add the `'worklet'` directive to the function:

```ts
// foo.js
export function foo() {
  'worklet'; // Won't work without it.
  return {
    width: 100,
  };
}

// bar.ts
import { foo } from './foo';
const style = useAnimatedStyle(foo);
```

### Custom hooks

Currently Reanimated hasn't exposed APIs that would allow you to register your custom hooks for callback workletization. This however, might change in the future.

### Expressions

When the worklet is a result of an expression, it won't get autoworkletized hence you need to add the `'worklet'` directive to it manually:

```ts
const foo = someCondition
  ? () => {
      'worklet'; // Won't work without it.
      return { width: 100 };
    }
  : () => {
      'worklet'; // Won't work without it.
      return { width: 200 };
    };

const style = useAnimatedStyle(foo);
```

> In such cases we recommend you to handle the conditional logic in the worklet itself or to refactor your code to avoid the need for conditional worklets.

Reviewer 3: just loose suggestion, something felt off here with 'to refactor your code to ...'

```suggestion
In such cases we recommend either handling the conditional logic in the worklet itself or refactoring your code to eliminate the need for conditional worklets.
```

Author: I wanted to use active voice as our guru @kacperkapusciak has taught us.

Reviewer 3: i'm still learning this mystic knowledge, sorry :c

## Pitfalls

> There are some patterns that won't work with the plugin, regardless of whether they are autoworkletizable or not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are some patterns that won't work with the plugin.
```
the second part of the sentence is a bit of a mouthful

  // autoworkletized. You don't need to add the 'worklet' directive here.
  return {
    width: 100,
  };
});
```

## What can be a worklet?

Currently, Reanimated Babel Plugin supports the following constructs as worklets:

- Function Declarations

```ts
function foo() {
  'worklet';
  console.log('Hello from FunctionDeclaration');
}
```

- Function Expressions

```ts
const foo = function () {
  'worklet';
  console.log('Hello from FunctionExpression');
};
```

- Arrow Function Expressions

```ts
const foo = () => {
  'worklet';
  console.log('Hello from ArrowFunctionExpression');
};
```

- Object Methods

```ts
const obj = {
  foo() {
    'worklet';
    console.log('Hello from ObjectMethod');
  },
};
```

## Autoworkletization

To reduce boilerplate code and provide a safer API, Reanimated Babel Plugin detects automatically whether a function should be workletized. Thanks to that, you don't need to add the `'worklet'` directive to your callbacks:

```ts
const style = useAnimatedStyle(() => {
  // You don't need to add the 'worklet' directive here,
  // since plugin detects this callback as autoworkletizable.
  return {
    width: 100,
  };
});
```

> This isn't limited to `useAnimatedStyle` hook - Reanimated Babel Plugin autoworkletizes all callbacks for the API of Reanimated. The whole list can be found in the [plugin source code](https://github.com/software-mansion/react-native-reanimated/blob/main/plugin/src/autoworkletization.ts).

Reviewer 4: This link doesn't work   🦅 ❗❗ 
```suggestion
This isn't limited to `useAnimatedStyle` hook - Reanimated Babel Plugin autoworkletizes all callbacks for the API of Reanimated. The whole list can be found in the [plugin source code](https://github.com/software-mansion/react-native-reanimated/blob/main/packages/react-native-reanimated/plugin/src/autoworkletization.ts).
```

    console.log('Scrolling...');
  },
};

const handler = useAnimatedScrollHandler(handlerObject);
```

### Workletizing whole files (experimental)

You can mark a file as a workletizable file by adding the `'worklet'` directive to the top of the file. This will make all _top-level_ entities workletized. This can come in handy for files that contain multiple worklets.

```ts
'worklet';

function foo() {
  // Function 'foo' will be autoworkletized.
  return { width: 100 };
}

function bar() {
  // Function 'bar' will be autoworkletized.
  function foobar() {
    // Function 'foobar' won't since it's not defined in top-level scope.
    console.log("I'm not a worklet");
  }
  return { width: 100 };
}
```

## Limits of autoworkletization

The plugin cannot infer whether a function is autoworkletizable or not in some contexts.

### Imports

When importing a function from another file or a module and using it as a worklet, you must manually add the `'worklet'` directive to the function:

```ts
// foo.js
export function foo() {
  'worklet'; // Won't work without it.
  return {
    width: 100,
  };
}

// bar.ts
import { foo } from './foo';
const style = useAnimatedStyle(foo);

> ```

Reviewer 4: I'd swap places of these two file snippets. I think it is more clear if we firstly define the context (importing function to use it in useAnimatedStyle) and then show a snippet (similar to many others before), but with a forced 'worklet' directive
